[KOGITO-7249] Guide for gRPC (#4)
kiegroup/kogito-docs: serverlessworkflow/modules/ROOT/pages/service-orchestration/orchestration-of-grpc-services.adoc

= Orchestration of gRPC based services

> Learn how to invoke a gRPC from a Serverless Workflow running a quarkus. This guide covers:

Reviewer: Shouldn't we just say serverless workflowm or maybe even workflow?  I think the context is clear here that we're talking about the Kogito implementation, no need to repeat that imho.

* Creating a workflow that invokes a running gRPC service. 
* Setting up properties to locate the running service. 

== Prerequisites

It's expected you have read how to create-your-first-workflow-service.html[Create Your First Workflow Guide]. 

> It's assumed you are familiar with main https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/core-concepts/[gRPC] concepts. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's assumed you are familiar with the main link:https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/core-concepts/[gRPC] concepts. 
```

Author: hmmm, I do not think the link: is needed

== Solution

> In this guide, we'll go through a Serverless Workflow application that greets a user in their preferred language by invoking a grpc service.

Reviewer: gRPC for consistency

> The application is located in the `serverless-workflow-greeting-client-rpc-quarkus`
> https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/main/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-rpc-quarkus/serverless-workflow-greeting-client-rpc-quarkus[directory].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The application is located in the `serverless-workflow-greeting-client-rpc-quarkus`
link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/main/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-rpc-quarkus/serverless-workflow-greeting-client-rpc-quarkus[directory].
```

== Architecture

> There are following main components of this workflow application:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are the following main components of this workflow application:
```

Reviewer: These are main components ... ?

> * https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/main/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-rpc-quarkus/serverless-workflow-greeting-server-rpc-quarkus/src/main/proto/greeting.proto[grpc proto file]
> * https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/main/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-rpc-quarkus/serverless-workflow-greeting-client-rpc-quarkus/src/main/resources/jsongreet.sw.json[worfklow definition file]
> * https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/main/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-rpc-quarkus/serverless-workflow-greeting-client-rpc-quarkus/pom.xml[Maven POM]
> * https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/main/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-rpc-quarkus/serverless-workflow-greeting-client-rpc-quarkus/src/main/resources/application.properties[Application properties]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/main/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-rpc-quarkus/serverless-workflow-greeting-server-rpc-quarkus/src/main/proto/greeting.proto[grpc proto file]
* link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/main/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-rpc-quarkus/serverless-workflow-greeting-client-rpc-quarkus/src/main/resources/jsongreet.sw.json[worfklow definition file]
* link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/main/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-rpc-quarkus/serverless-workflow-greeting-client-rpc-quarkus/pom.xml[Maven POM]
* link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/main/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-rpc-quarkus/serverless-workflow-greeting-client-rpc-quarkus/src/main/resources/application.properties[Application properties]
```

=== gRPC proto file

> This file defines a greeter service consisting of a sayHello method. This method accepts two parameters: the name of the user and the optional language to use in the greet message (English by default). The method returns the greeting message in the proper language.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This file defines a greeter service consisting of the `sayHello` method. This method accepts two parameters: the user's name and the optional language to use in the greeting message (English by default). The method returns the greeting message in the appropriate language.
```

> ----

Reviewer 2: @akumar074 do you know if we can add language snippets? Maybe we are missing *.proto files? 🤔

Reviewer 2: yeah, I guess we could have a snippet for it.

// The greeter service definition.
service Greeter {
  // Sends a greeting
  rpc SayHello (HelloRequest) returns (HelloReply) {}
}

// The request message containing the user's name.
message HelloRequest {
  string name = 1;
  string language=2;
}

// The response message containing the greetings
message HelloReply {
  string message = 1;
}
----

=== Workflow definition file

> The flow defines a rpc https://github.com/serverlessworkflow/specification/blob/main/specification.md#using-functions-for-rpc-service-invocations[function]. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The flow defines a RPC link:https://github.com/serverlessworkflow/specification/blob/main/specification.md#using-functions-for-rpc-service-invocations[function]. 
```

Reviewer: an RPC

[source,json]
----

"functions": [
    {
      "name": "sayHello",
      "type": "rpc",
      "operation": "greeting.proto#Greeter#SayHello"
    }
  ]
----

> The `operation` property is composed by three tokens separated by #: the uri of the proto file, the name of the service and the name of the method. Kogito supports three URI schemes: htpp, file and classpath, the latter being the default. Therefore, in this particular case, the flow is declaring that greeting.proto is expected to be found in the project classpath.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `operation` property is composed of three tokens separated by #: the URI of the proto file, the name of the service, and the name of the method. Kogito supports three URI schemes: `http`, `file`, and `classpath`, the latter being the default. Therefore, in this case, the flow declares that `greeting.proto` is expected to be found in the project classpath.
```

> The flow execution consist of a single https://github.com/serverlessworkflow/specification/blob/main/specification.md#operation-state[operation] state, composed by one https://github.com/serverlessworkflow/specification/blob/main/specification.md#action-definition[action].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The flow execution consists of a single link:https://github.com/serverlessworkflow/specification/blob/main/specification.md#operation-state[operation] state, composed of one https://github.com/serverlessworkflow/specification/blob/main/specification.md#action-definition[action].
```

[source,json]
----
 {
    "name": "sayHello",
    "functionRef" : {
        "refName": "sayHello",
        "arguments": {
            "name": ".name",
            "language": ".language"
        }
    }
}
----

> The action invokes `sayHello` rpc method using as  parameters two model variables: `name` and `language`, provided as part of the REST call that starts the flow. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The action invokes the `sayHello` RPC method using as parameters two model variables: `name` and `language`, provided as part of the REST call that starts the flow. 
```

 
=== Application properties

We need to tell the application where the grpc server is located

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.grpc.clients.Greeter.host=localhost
quarkus.grpc.clients.Greeter.port=50051
----

> Internally, Kogito Serverless workflow implementation use the exact set of properties than https://quarkus.io/guides/grpc-service-consumption#client-configuration[Quarkus grpc client].
> The "client-name" used by kogito is the service name declared in the proto file. `Greeter` in this case
> 
> Why port is 50051?. In the same repo than the workflow application, there is available a https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/main/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-rpc-quarkus/serverless-workflow-greeting-server-rpc-quarkus[maven project] that provides a simple implementation of the greeter service. By default, this gRPC server runs on port 50051, hence the value for the port property. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Internally, the Kogito Serverless Workflow implementation uses the same set of properties as link:https://quarkus.io/guides/grpc-service-consumption#client-configuration[Quarkus gRPC client].
The "client-name" used by Kogito is the service name declared in the proto file. `Greeter` in this case.

Why is port 50051? In the same repo as the workflow application, a link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/main/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-rpc-quarkus/serverless-workflow-greeting-server-rpc-quarkus[maven project] is available, which provides a simple implementation of the greeter service. By default, this gRPC server runs on port 50051, hence the value for the port property. 
```

=== Maven POM 

> gRPC functionality is built within https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-runtimes/tree/main/quarkus/extensions/kogito-quarkus-serverless-workflow-extension[Serverless Workflow Quarkus extension], which means that there is not need to include specific dependencies for gRPC to work with Serverless workflow. 
> The same set of dependencies that are included for the Hello Workflow example will work. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
gRPC functionality is built within link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-runtimes/tree/main/quarkus/extensions/kogito-quarkus-serverless-workflow-extension[Serverless Workflow Quarkus extension], which means that there is no need to include specific dependencies for gRPC to work with Serverless Workflow. 
The same set of dependencies included for the Hello Workflow example will work. 
```

One section of the pom that deserve mention is this one

[source,xml]
----
<resource>
 <directory>${project.basedir}/../serverless-workflow-greeting-server-rpc-quarkus/src/main/proto</directory>
 <includes>
   <include>greeting.proto</include>
  </includes>
</resource>
----

> Remember that the URI of the proto file specified in the workflow is expecting the proto file to be in the project classpath. This snippet ensures the proto file defined in the grpc server project is included in the classpath of the workflow application. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Remember that the URI of the proto file specified in the workflow is expecting the proto file to be in the project's classpath. Therefore, this snippet ensures the proto file defined in the gRPC server project is included in the classpath of the workflow application. 
```

Reviewer: Shouldn't we in general be explaining more how people can _add_ a gRPC call to their workflow, rather than just explaining how the example works?  So in that case we would be describing you need to add this to your pom.xml?

> Note that in a real production enviromment, it is very unlikely you need to do that. Reason is that the file proto will be either within the project directory structure or can be downloaded from a remote server (in which case the URI will include the http scheme).   

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that it is very unlikely you need to do that in a real production environment. The reason is that the file proto will be either within the project directory structure or can be downloaded from a remote server (in which case the URI will include the `http` scheme).   
```

== Running the Application

Before running the workflow application, we need to start the gRPC server that is going to be invoked by the worklow. 

> To run the gRPC server, go to `serverless-workflow-greeting-server-rpc-quarkus` directory and execute command

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To run the gRPC server, go to the `serverless-workflow-greeting-server-rpc-quarkus` directory and execute the command:
```

[source, shell]
----
mvn compile exec:java -Dexec.mainClass="org.kie.kogito.examples.sw.greeting.GreeterService"
----

> Then, to run the workflow application, use

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, to run the workflow application, use:
```

[source,shell]
----
mvn clean quarkus:dev
----

> Once started, you run a workflow instance though `curl`, specifying as body the name and the language to be used in the gRPC service call

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once started, you run a workflow instance through `curl`, specifying as body the name and language used in the gRPC service call.
```

[source,shell]
----
curl -X POST -H 'Content-Type:application/json' -H 'Accept:application/json' -d '{"workflowdata" : {"name": "John", "language": "English"}}' http://localhost:8080/jsongreet
----

The response should be similar to:

[source,shell]
----
{"id":"4376cc50-42d4-45ef-8a5e-6e403a654a30","workflowdata":{"name":"John","language":"English","message":"Hello from gRPC service John"}}
----

> Now, you can try greeting in a different language

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, you can try greeting in a different language:
```

= Orchestration of gRPC based services

Learn how to invoke a gRPC service from a Kogito Serverless Workflow running with Quarkus. This guide covers:

* Creating a workflow that invokes a running gRPC service. 
* Configuring properties to locate the running service. 

== Prerequisites

> It's expected that you have read the how to link:create-your-first-workflow-service.html[Create Your First Workflow] guide. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It's expected that you have read the how to xref:getting-started/create-your-first-workflow-service.adoc[Create Your First Workflow] guide.
[Create Your First Workflow] guide. 
```
When referencing to other page in same module we need to use cross-reference `xref:` to `folder-name/page-name` containing the `adoc` file.
Refer [Antora docs](https://docs.antora.org/antora/2.0/navigation/link-syntax-and-content/)

> It's expected that you have read the how to link:create-your-first-workflow-service.html[Create Your First Workflow] guide. 

Reviewer 2: @akumar074 can we have a "how to write" guide in the readme?

> It's expected that you have read the how to link:create-your-first-workflow-service.html[Create Your First Workflow] guide. 

Reviewer 3: @ricardozanini Great idea! Sure, I will create JIRA to add the "How to write/Contribution guide" component within our guide.

> It's expected that you have read the how to link:create-your-first-workflow-service.html[Create Your First Workflow] guide. 

Reviewer 2: Lovely! Many thanks!

> It's assumed you are familiar with the main link:https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/core-concepts/[gRPC] concepts. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To get familiar with gRPC concepts please visit this link:https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/core-concepts/[gRPC] link 
```

> * link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/main/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-rpc-quarkus/serverless-workflow-greeting-server-rpc-quarkus/src/main/proto/greeting.proto[gRPC proto file]: This file defines a greeter service, which consists of the `sayHello` method. The `sayHello` method accepts two parameters, including name of the user and an optional language to use in the greeting message (English by default). The `sayHello` method returns the greeting message in the appropriate language, such as:

Reviewer 4: maybe for links, we can follow this best practice?
https://asciidoctor.org/docs/asciidoc-recommended-practices/#dry-urls

== Solution

In this guide, we'll go through a Serverless Workflow application that greets a user in their preferred language by invoking a gRPC service.

The application is located in the `serverless-workflow-greeting-client-rpc-quarkus`
link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/main/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-rpc-quarkus/serverless-workflow-greeting-client-rpc-quarkus[directory].

== Architecture

There are the following main files in this workflow application:

* link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/main/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-rpc-quarkus/serverless-workflow-greeting-server-rpc-quarkus/src/main/proto/greeting.proto[grpc proto file]

> * link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/main/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-rpc-quarkus/serverless-workflow-greeting-client-rpc-quarkus/src/main/resources/jsongreet.sw.json[worfklow definition file]

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/main/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-rpc-quarkus/serverless-workflow-greeting-client-rpc-quarkus/src/main/resources/jsongreet.sw.json[workflow definition file]
```

}

// The response message containing the greetings
message HelloReply {
  string message = 1;
}
----

* link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/main/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-rpc-quarkus/serverless-workflow-greeting-client-rpc-quarkus/src/main/resources/jsongreet.sw.json[Workflow definition file]: This file defines an RPC link:https://github.com/serverlessworkflow/specification/blob/main/specification.md#using-functions-for-rpc-service-invocations[function].
+
--
.Example RPC function
[source,json]
----

"functions": [
    {
      "name": "sayHello",
      "type": "rpc",
      "operation": "greeting.proto#Greeter#SayHello"
    }
  ]
----

In the previous example function, the `operation` property is composed of three tokens separated by `#`. The three tokes include:

** URI of the proto file (For example: `greeting.proto`)
** Name of the service (For example: `Greeter`)
** Name of the method (For example: `SayHello`)

Kogito supports three URI schemes, including `http`, `file`, and `classpath` (default). Therefore, in the previous example, the `greeting.proto` is expected to be found in the project classpath.

> The execution of the workflow consists of a single link:https://github.com/serverlessworkflow/specification/blob/main/specification.md#operation-state[operation] state, which is composed of one link:https://github.com/serverlessworkflow/specification/blob/main/specification.md#action-definition[action].

Reviewer 2: All spec links must be the tagged ones.

> The execution of the workflow consists of a single link:https://github.com/serverlessworkflow/specification/blob/main/specification.md#operation-state[operation] state, which is composed of one link:https://github.com/serverlessworkflow/specification/blob/main/specification.md#action-definition[action].

Author: Im not sure I agree with that. 
If the spec changes, we will update the example and the guide. If we use tag, it means we are frozen the example and the guide, which I do not think is the real situation.

.Example action
[source,json]
----
 {
    "name": "sayHello",
    "functionRef" : {
        "refName": "sayHello",
        "arguments": {
            "name": ".name",
            "language": ".language"
        }
    }
}
----

In the previous example, the action invokes the `sayHello` RPC method using two model variables as parameters, such as `name` and `language`. These parameters are provided as part of the REST call that starts the workflow.
--

> * link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/main/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-rpc-quarkus/serverless-workflow-greeting-client-rpc-quarkus/pom.xml[Maven POM]: The gRPC functionality is included within link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-runtimes/tree/main/quarkus/extensions/kogito-quarkus-serverless-workflow-extension[Serverless Workflow Quarkus extension], which means you do not need to add specific dependencies for gRPC to work with Serverless Workflow. The same set of dependencies are included for the Hello Workflow example.

Reviewer 2: Hmm regarding these links, we an easily link to the tags using Antora variables like: 

```
https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/{kogito_version}/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-order-processing
```

Regarding the conversation, I agree. We will raise this on Monday meeting.

+
--
However, the `pom.xml` file contains the following resource:

.Example `pom.xml` file
[source,xml]
----
<resource>
 <directory>${project.basedir}/../serverless-workflow-greeting-server-rpc-quarkus/src/main/proto</directory>
 <includes>
   <include>greeting.proto</include>
  </includes>
</resource>
----

> Note that in the gRPC proto file, the specified URI does not contain any scheme, therefore the file is expected to be accessible in the classpath of the project. The previous example of `pom.xml` file ensures that the proto file defined in the gRPC project is included in the classpath of the Serverless Workflow application.

Author: @krisv I added more information to this paragraph. 
Regarding the developers without java exprience, we have an issue with URIS without schema. 
We are currently supporting three schemas: classpath (default, used when there is not schema), file and http
Obviously the fact that classpath is the default is exposing the unavoidable truth that kogito implementation of Serverless Workfflow specification is Java based, but still users (as explained in the updated paragraph) can use file and http uris. 
The same (the unavoidable truth that Kogito is run over Quarkus is exposed by the fact that the properties for OpenAPI contains the work Quarkus)
But this guide needs to include this discussion and a good way to make developers aware of the issue of how to deal with the proto file (which is basicallty the only extra thing they need to when using gRPC) is to discuss this maven snippet. 
If I just copy the proto file into, lets say, resources, we will still have the classpath thing, but hidden and the paragraph will still has to be there, explaining the classpath detail.

quarkus.grpc.clients.Greeter.host=localhost
quarkus.grpc.clients.Greeter.port=50051
----

Internally, the Kogito Serverless Workflow implementation uses the same set of properties as link:https://quarkus.io/guides/grpc-service-consumption#client-configuration[Quarkus gRPC client].
The "client-name" used by Kogito is the service name declared in the proto file. `Greeter` in this case.

> Why is port 50051? In the same repo as the workflow application, a link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/main/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-rpc-quarkus/serverless-workflow-greeting-server-rpc-quarkus[maven project] is available, which provides a simple implementation of the greeter service. By default, this gRPC server runs on port 50051, hence the value for the port property. 

Reviewer 4: isn't repo word confusing here?
maybe same project or the default port use by quarkus grpc extension?

Author: I mean github repository, will change that

=== Maven POM 

> gRPC functionality is built within link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-runtimes/tree/main/quarkus/extensions/kogito-quarkus-serverless-workflow-extension[Serverless Workflow Quarkus extension], which means that there is no need to include specific dependencies for gRPC to work with Serverless Workflow. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
gRPC functionality is built with link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-runtimes/tree/main/quarkus/extensions/kogito-quarkus-serverless-workflow-extension[Serverless Workflow Quarkus extension], which means that there is no need to include specific dependencies for gRPC to work with Serverless Workflow. 
```

Author: I want to say that grpc functinality is included in the extention, should I use built in?

The same set of dependencies included for the Hello Workflow example will work. 

> One section of the pom.xml file that deserves mention is this one:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
One section of the pom.xml file that needs attention is this one:
```

[source,xml]
----
<resource>
 <directory>${project.basedir}/../serverless-workflow-greeting-server-rpc-quarkus/src/main/proto</directory>
 <includes>
   <include>greeting.proto</include>
  </includes>
</resource>
----

> Remember that the proto file, because the URI specified for it does not have any scheme, is expected to be accessible in the project's classpath. Therefore, this snippet ensures the proto file defined in the gRPC server project is included in the classpath of the workflow application. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Remember that the proto file, because the URI specified for it does not have any scheme, is expected to be accessible in the project's classpath. Therefore, this snippet ensures the proto file defined in the gRPC server project is included in the workflow application's classpath. 
```

> You can also use the example application `serverless-workflow-greeting-client-rpc-quarkus` in

Reviewer 6: I would maybe clarify that it is in fact the "complete" SWF application, when I was reading it it wasn't obvious until I clicked on the link.

Author: this parragraph does not really meke sense, I removed it

To run the gRPC server, go to the `serverless-workflow-greeting-server-rpc-quarkus` directory and execute the command:
[source, shell]
----
mvn compile exec:java -Dexec.mainClass="org.kie.kogito.examples.sw.greeting.GreeterService"
----

Then, to run the workflow application, use:

[source,shell]
----
mvn clean quarkus:dev
----

Once started, you run a workflow instance through `curl`, specifying as body the name and language used in the gRPC service call.

[source,shell]
----
curl -X POST -H 'Content-Type:application/json' -H 'Accept:application/json' -d '{"workflowdata" : {"name": "John", "language": "English"}}' http://localhost:8080/jsongreet
----

The response should be similar (`id` will be different for every execution) to:

[source,shell]
----
{"id":"4376cc50-42d4-45ef-8a5e-6e403a654a30","workflowdata":{"name":"John","language":"English","message":"Hello from gRPC service John"}}
----

Now, you can try greeting in a different language:

[source,shell]
----
curl -X POST -H 'Content-Type:application/json' -H 'Accept:application/json' -d '{"workflowdata" : {"name": "Javi", "language": "Spanish"}}' http://localhost:8080/jsongreet
----

> And enjoy the greet in Spanish ;)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
And enjoy the greeting in Spanish ;)
```
